---
title: The power of play
date: 2023-06-06
categories:
  - IELTS
tags:
  - Reading
---
## The power of play

Virtually every child, the world over, plays. The drive to play is so intense that children will do so in any **circumstances**, for instance when they have no real toys, or when parents do not actively encourage the behavior. **In the eyes of** a young child, running, **pretending**, and building are fun. Researchers and educators know that these playful activities benefit the development of the whole child across social, cognitive, physical, and emotional domains. Indeed, play is such an **instrumental** component to healthy child development that the United Nations High Commission on Human Rights (1989) recognized play as a fundamental right of every child.

Yet, while experts continue to **expound** a powerful argument for the importance of play in children’s lives, the **actual** time children spend playing continues to decrease. Today, children play eight hours less each week than their **counterparts** did two decades ago (Elkind 2008). Under pressure of rising academic standards, play is being replaced by test preparation in **kindergartens** and **grade schools**, and parents who aim to give their **preschoolers** **a leg up** **are led to believe** that flashcards and educational 'toys’ are **the path to success**. Our society has created a false dichotomy between play and learning.

Through play, children learn to regulate their behavior, **lay the foundations for** later learning in science and mathematics, figure out the complex negotiations of social relationships, build a **repertoire** of creative problem-solving skills, and so much more. There is also an important role for adults in guiding children through playful learning opportunities.

Full **consensus** on a formal definition of play continues to **elude** the researchers and theorists who study it. Definitions range from **discrete** descriptions of various types of play such as physical, construction, language, or symbolic play (Miller & Almon 2009), to lists of broad criteria, based on observations and attitudes, that are meant to capture the essence of all play behaviors (e.g. Rubin et al. 1983).

A majority of the contemporary definitions of play focus on several key criteria. The founder of the National Institute for Play, Stuart Brown, has described play as 'anything that spontaneously is done for its own sake’. More specifically, he says it 'appears purposeless, produces pleasure and joy, [and] leads one to the next stage of **mastery**’ (as quoted in Tippett 2008). Similarly, Miller and Almon (2009) say that play includes 'activities that are freely chosen and directed by children and arise from intrinsic motivation’. Often, play is defined **along** a continuum as more or less playful using the following set of behavioral and dispositional criteria (e.g. Rubin et al. 1983):

> Play is pleasurable: Children must enjoy the activity or it is not play. It is intrinsically motivated: Children engage in play simply for the satisfaction the behavior itself brings. It has no extrinsically motivated function or goal. Play is process oriented: When children play, the means are more important than the ends. It is freely chosen, spontaneous and voluntary. If a child is pressured, they will likely not think of the activity as play. Play is actively engaged: Players must be physically and/or mentally involved in the activity. Play is non-literal. It involves make-believe.

According to this view, children’s playful behaviors can range in degree from 0% to 100% playful. Rubin and colleagues did not assign greater weight to any one **dimension** in determining playfulness; however, other researchers have suggested that process orientation and a lack of obvious functional purpose may be the most important aspects of play (e.g. Pellegrini 2009).

From the perspective of a continuum, play can thus blend with other motives and attitudes that are less playful, such as work. Unlike play, work is typically not viewed as enjoyable and it is extrinsically motivated (i.e. it is goal oriented). Researcher Joan Goodman (1994) suggested that hybrid forms of work and play are not a detriment to learning; rather, they can provide **optimal** contexts for learning. For example, a child may be engaged in a difficult, goal-directed activity set up by their teacher, but they may still be actively engaged and intrinsically motivated. At this mid-point between play and work, the child’s motivation, **coupled** with guidance from an adult, can create robust opportunities for playful learning.

Critically, recent research supports the idea that adults can **facilitate** children’s learning while maintaining a playful approach in interactions known as 'guided play’ (Fisher et al. 2011). The adult’s role in play varies as a **function** of their educational goals and the child’s developmental level (Hirsch-Pasek et al. 2009).

Guided play takes two forms. At a very basic level, adults can enrich the child’s environment by providing objects or experiences that promote aspects of a curriculum. In the **more direct** form of guided play, parents or other adults can support children’s play by joining in the fun as a co-player, raising thoughtful questions, commenting on children’s discoveries, or encouraging further exploration or new **facets** to the child’s activity. Although playful learning can be somewhat structured, it must also be child-centered (Nicolopolou et al. 2006). Play should stem from the child’s own desire.

Both free and guided play are essential elements in a child-centered approach to playful learning. Intrinsically motivated free play provides the child with true autonomy, while guided play is an **avenue** through which parents and educators can provide more targeted learning experiences. In either case, play should be actively engaged, it should be predominantly child-directed, and it must be fun.


1. Economists and officers know that these liberal policies benefit the development of the whole nation across financial, social, and educational domains.
2. Indeed, exercise is such an instrumental component to healthy child development that the government legislates PE as a compulsory subject in schools.
3. Yet, while experts continue to expound a powerful argument for the importance of water conservation, the actual use of water continues to increase.
4. Yet, while experts continue to expound a powerful argument against the growing industrial exhaust fumes, the actual emissions from factories continue to increase.
5. In China, children learn five hours more each day than their counterparts do in Australia
6. Today, people spend on luxury twice as much annually as their counterparts did two decades ago.
7. Under pressure of the domestic economic downturn and following wave of unemployment, peace is being replaced by violence in cities, and radical politicians are led to believe that engaging in a war against another country is the solution.
8. Through communicating with foreign teachers, students learn to express their opinions, lay the foundations for further learning overseas, figure out the complex negotiations with foreigners, build a repertoire of efficient language-learning skills, and so much more.
9. In addition to teachers, there is also an important role for parents in assisting children through learning opportunities.
10. A consensus of opinion on international trade between these countries continues to elude the economists and policymakers.
11. Rubin and colleagues did not assign greater weight to any one dimension in determining happiness; however, other researchers have suggested that family life and career security should be the most important aspects of happiness.

## Why companies should welcome disorder 

Organisation is big business. Whether it is of our lives - all those **inboxes** and calendars - or how companies are structured, a multi-billion dollar industry helps to meet this need. 
  
We have more strategies for time management, project management and self-organisation than at any other time in human history. We are told that we ought to organize our company, our home life, our week, our day and even our sleep, all as a means to becoming more productive. Every week, countless seminars and workshops take place around the world to tell a paying public that they ought to structure their lives in order to achieve this.   
  
This rhetoric has also crept into the thinking of business leaders and entrepreneurs, much to the delight of self-proclaimed perfectionists with the need to get everything right. The number of business schools and graduates has massively increased over the past 50 years, essentially teaching people how to organize well. 

Ironically, however, the number of businesses that fail has also steadily increased. Work-related stress has increased. A large proportion of workers from all demographics claim to be dissatisfied with the way their work is structured and the way they are managed. 
  
This begs the question: what has gone wrong? Why is it that on paper the drive for organisation seems a sure shot for increasing productivity, but in reality falls well short of what is expected? 

This has been a problem for a while now. Frederick Taylor was one of the forefathers of scientific management. Writing in the first half of the 20th century, he designed a number of principles to improve the efficiency of the work process, which have since become widespread in modern companies. So the approach has been around for a while. 

New research suggests that this obsession with efficiency is misguided. The problem is not necessarily the management theories or strategies we use to organize our work; it’s the basic assumptions we hold in approaching how we work. Here it’s the assumption that order is a necessary condition for productivity. This assumption has also fostered the idea that disorder must be detrimental to organisational productivity. The result is that businesses and people spend time and money organizing themselves for the sake of organizing, rather than actually looking at the end goal and usefulness of such an effort. 

What’s more, recent studies show that order actually has diminishing returns. Order does increase productivity to a certain extent, but eventually the usefulness of the process of organisation, and the benefit it yields, reduce until the point where any further increase in order reduces productivity. Some argue that in a business, if the cost of formally structuring something outweighs the benefit of doing it, then that thing ought not to be formally structured. Instead, the resources involved can be better used elsewhere. 

In fact, research shows that, when innovating, the best approach is to create an environment devoid of structure and hierarchy and enable everyone involved to engage as one organic group. These environments can lead to new solutions that, under conventionally structured environments (filled with bottlenecks in terms of information flow, power structures, rules, and routines) would never be reached. 

In recent times companies have slowly started to embrace this disorganization. Many of them embrace it in terms of perception (embracing the idea of disorder, as opposed to fearing it) and in terms of process (putting mechanisms in place to reduce structure).   

For example, Oticon, a large Danish manufacturer of hearing aids, used what it called a 'spaghetti’ structure in order to reduce the organisation’s rigid hierarchies. This involved scrapping formal job titles and giving staff huge amounts of ownership over their own time and projects. This approach proved to be highly successful initially, with clear improvements in worker productivity in all facets of the business.   

In similar fashion, the former chairman of General Electric embraced disorganization, putting forward the idea of the 'boundaryless' organisation. Again, it involves breaking down the barriers between different parts of a company and encouraging virtual collaboration and flexible working. Google and a number of other tech companies have embraced (at least in part) these kinds of flexible structures, facilitated by technology and strong company values which glue people together. 

A word of warning to others thinking of jumping on this bandwagon: the evidence so far suggests disorder, much like order, also seems to have diminishing utility, and can also have detrimental effects on performance if overused. Like order, disorder should be embraced only so far as it is useful. But we should not fear it - nor venerate one over the other. This research also shows that we should continually question whether or not our existing assumptions work.